Thanks.  Okay. Can  everyone  hear  me? Good. Great. Okay,  thumbs  up. Alright. So  I  want  to  talk  to  you  about  how  we  can measure  brain  networks  using  particular  method. And  I'm  going  to  focus  on  functional  connectivity  MRI. So  we'll  get  into  that. But  first,  I  just  want to  start  with  a  little  bit  of  background. I  think  it's  important  to  talk  about the  levels  of  investigation  in  neuroscience. So  for  my  work  in  this  lecture, I'll  be  talking  mainly  about  tools  that are  used  cognitive  neuroscience. But  if  you've  taken  a  neuroscience  class, you  know  that  there  are  many  different  levels in  which  you  can  study  neuroscience. So  there's  many  things  that  we  can  actually  look  at. Now  if  you  haven't  taken  a  neuro  class, then  this  might  be  new  to  you  and  that's  fine. Then  I  just  want  to  introduce  you  to  some  of  the, some  of  these  basic  concepts. Okay,  So  how  can  we  study  things  in  neuroscience? Neuroscience  were  just  looking  at  the  nervous  system. It's,  this  can  be  the  central  nervous  system or  the  peripheral  nervous  system. But  what  we  can  do  is  we  can  look  at things  in  terms  of  scale. So  this  is  literally  in  terms  of  size. So  we  can  start  small. So  I'm  going  to  start  at  the  bottom  here. So  we  can  study  things  at  this  molecular  level. Like  you  may  be  interested  in a  particular  neurotransmitter,  that  molecule. So  e.g.  glutamate. And  you  can  perform  experiments  and  actually study  how  that  molecule  functions, where  it  is,  etc. Okay. Now  you  can  move  up  and  get  a  little,  a  little  bigger. Molecules  are  very  tiny, were  still  very  tiny, but  getting  a  little  bigger  and  you  can study  at  the  level  of  the  synapse. This  is  the  interface  between  neurons  where they  talk  to  each  other  and  communicate  with  each  other. You  could  then  also  move  up  and  study  the  entire  neuron. Alright?  So  now  you  can maybe  look  at  the  neuron  as  a  whole, look  at  its  structure. Different  neurons  have  different  structures. This  is  the  most  prototypical  neuron  that  you  see, but  they're  not  often  looking  exactly  like  this. So  you  can  study  different  anatomy  of  neurons. You  can  study  how  it  sends  information  e.g. down  its  axons. There's  a  lot  of  things  you  can  look at  at  the  level  of  the  neuron. Okay,  then  you  can  study what  we're  calling  here  networks. And  so  this  is  how  neurons are  connected  together  to  form  a  circuit. Okay,  So  this  example  that  I'm  showing  you  here, this  is  just  a  schematic  drawing  of  the  hippocampus. And  there's  different  parts  of the  hippocampus  with  different  cell  types. And  you  can  study how  these  different  cells  talk  to  each  other. So  e.g.  input  to  the  hippocampus  comes  here. And  then  these  neurons  project  to  neurons  here, and  then  these  neurons  project  to  neurons  here. And  so  you  can  study  this  flow of  information,  this  circuitry. Okay?  Then  you  can  move  up. We're  getting  even  bigger  in  scale and  study  things  like  maps. And  so  what  we're  referring  to here  is  looking  at  functional  activity in  the  brain  that  is  related  to some  sort  of  function  and  mapping  that  out. So  e.g.  what  part  of the  brain  increases  its  activity when  I  move  my  hand,  this  part. Okay. What  part  of  the  brain  increases its  activity  when  I  move  my  foot?  This  part. And  so  you  can  find  these  maps  of different  things  like  the  body  in  the  brain. Moving  up  even  more, you  can  study  systems. How  do  multiple  brain  regions  come  together  and  really cooperatively  work  to  allow the  brain  to  perform  some  certain  function. This  is  really  the  level  that  I'll  be  talking  about. You  see  brain  regions  and  how  they  interact to  get  to  some  behavior  or  some  cognitive  function. Then  you  can  study  the  entire  central  nervous  system. I'm  not,  not  pulled  out  of  the  body  like  this,  right? But  what  this  is  really  representing  is just  studying  the  entire  human  beings. So  this  would  be  things  like  studying someone's  behavior  or  cognitive  functions. Like  if  you've  been  in  one  of these  experiments  in  SONA  and  you  go  into  a  lab and  press  some  buttons  that  studying  cognition  at this  more  whole  person  level,  right? So  we've  moved  up  in  terms  of  size  and  scale  here. Now,  what  I'm  going  to  be  really  talking  about today  are  these  larger  scales, systems  level  of  neuroscience. Now,  I  want  to  make  a  note  about nomenclature  here  because  it  gets  confusing. So  in  the  title  of  the  talk, I  talk  about  networks. And  here  I'm  telling  you,  Well, networks  are  down  here  and  we're going  to  be  talking  about  systems. Neuroscience. These  are  the  levels  of  investigations. But  what  happened  was  people who  really  are  studying  systems,  right? So  at  this  broader  systems  level, use  the  term  networks  because  we started  thinking  about  brain  regions  interacting. And  when  we  do  that,  we  have  drawn  a  lot from  mathematical  models  and things  like  network  analysis. So  because  of  that, people  started  calling  these  things  brain  networks. Okay? So  what  I  want  you  to  keep  in mind  is  that  what  we're  going  to  be  talking  about, even  though  I  will  use  the  term  networks, because  that  is  what  the  field  uses. In  papers,  in  talks. The  field  uses  this  term  networks. But  I  am  talking  about the  systems  level  of  neuroscience  here. Not  this. We're  not  looking  at neurons  and  how  they  connect  together. Just  want  to  make  that  very  clear. Okay,  so  historically  in  neuroscience, there's  often  been  two  ways  of  viewing  brain  function. So  the  first  is  on  the  left  here,  specialized  processing. So  you  may  have  heard  the  term  localization  of  function. This  is  referring  to  a  specific  part  of  the  brain, is  responsible  for  a  specific  function. So  like  in  this  example, they  have  this  whole  area  is  involved  in  intellect. This  area  is  involved  in  music. I  mean,  this  is  kind  of  a  silly  schematic, but  it  gives  you  the  idea. Alright? In  contrast,  we  can  talk  about  how these  different  regions  interact  with  each  other. Okay? So  this  is  the  interaction  of  brain  regions. Now  in  cognitive  science, in  cognitive  neuroscience  and  psychology, and  neuroscience  in  general, we  often  we  care  about  in  this  department, especially  human  cognition  and  behavior. And  what  we  know  these  days  is  that these  complex  human  behaviors and  cognitive  functions  depend  on specialized  processing  within  individual  regions, as  well  as  the  coordinated  interactions  between  them. Okay? So  it  really  does  involve  both. Now,  historically  in  neuroscience, sometimes  you'll  see  the  pendulum  swing  with what  is  favored  and  how  things  are  steady. That's  some  point.  People  thought the  entire  brain  interacted in  a  way  where  if  you  damage  one  part, you  affect  everything,  right? Then  it  swings  to this  more  localization  of  function  where,  oh, well  now  we're  just  studying this  particular  region  and  it's very  specialized  for  this  function. And  so  over  time  you  see  the  pendulum  swing. But  really  we  know, and  we're  kind  of  in  the  middle  here  these  days. We  really  know  that  it  is  this  interaction. Okay? So  how  can  we  actually  think  about  studying cognition  and  behavior  by  looking  at these  brains,  systems  or  networks. So  I  like  this. It's  somewhat  simplified  schematic that  illustrates  the  point. So  what  it's  showing  is  how  a  specialized  set  of regions  interact  with  each  other  at  the  systems  level. So  let's  imagine  this  scenario. So  think  about  you  have  some  input. So  you're  looking  at  something, let's  say  you're  looking  at a  big  picture  of  a  bunch  of  people. You're  scanning  the  picture  so  that  input, that  information  goes  into your  eye,  right?  Here's  the  eye. Okay? And  then  that  information  comes  into the  eye  right  on  the  retina. It's  projected,  does  a  couple  of  stops. And  there  we  go. The  first  place  that  it's  processed in  the  cortex  is  back  here. This  is  the  occipital  lobe. We  know  this  is,  there's  visual  cortex  here. Okay?  So  you  have  this  visual  input. I'm  going  to  this  part  of  the  cortex. And  so  we  often  call  this  a processing  region  or  processing system  because  it's  part  of  the  brain  that's involved  in  processing  information,  right? You're  just  processing  sensory  information in  this  case,  it's  visual. Okay. But  then  they  tell  you, you're  scanning  this  picture  of  a  bunch  of  people, look  for  a  person  in  a  blue  hat. Okay,  so  you  have  this  goal. I'm  going  to  find  a  person  in  a  blue  hat. So  now  what  happens  is  we have  what's  called  control  systems. Of  course,  this  is  very  oversimplified. I'm  highlighting  prefrontal  cortex  here. So  let's  say  prefrontal  cortex  is  involved  in  control. Alright? So  this  is  a  control  system where  that  part  of  the  brain  knows  your  goal. I  need  to  find  someone  wearing  a  blue  hat. So  now  you  have  input  coming  into  the  eye,  right? Visual,  going  to  the  visual  system, but  now  you  have  control  systems, let's  say  from  the  prefrontal  cortex  that  act on  that  sensory  information  and  basically  tell  you, Let's  find  blue,  Let's  focus  on  blue. And  so  it  really  directs your  attention  towards  things  that  are  blue. Okay? So  you're  exerting  this,  this  control, this  top-down  control  on  the  visual  input. This  actually  does  affect  how  we  see  things. So  when  I  tell  you, look  for  someone  in  a  blue  hat, now  things  that  are  blue  start  popping  out  to  you,  right? Because  you  know,  you're  focusing  your  attention  on  blue. Where  if  I  tell  your  friend, find  someone  in  a  red  hat, now  things  that  are  red  will  pop  out  to  them. So  you're  actually  seeing  the  image  somewhat  differently. So  you  have  this  control  system  acting. And  then  let's  say  I  tell  you,  okay, Now  push  the  button  when  you find  the  person  in  the  blue  hat, you  have  some  output. In  this  case,  right? You  have  like  motor  regions  that  control  your  hand. And  so  you  have visual  input  to  a  sensory  or  processing  system, control  systems  coming  down  with  your  goal  in  mind. And  then  this  affects  your  output. How  fast  you  are, let's  say  to  finding  the  person  in the  blue  hat  and  pressing  the  button  with  your  hand. Okay,  it's  influencing  your  behavior  there. Alright. So  that  was  very  simplified,  right? I  was  just  generalizing to  three  broad  regions  in  the  brain. But  there's  many,  many  different functional  regions  of  the  brain  and  they can  interact  with  each  other  and they  do  an  organized  ways. And  so  this  is  where  this  network  perspective comes  into  play  because  you  have a  bunch  of  different  brain  regions  that work  together  in  a  network  or  a  system. Alright?  So  we're  kinda, we're  looking  at  a  systems  level  of neuroscience  from  a  network  perspective. Okay? And  so  this  can  actually  be  really  useful for  understanding  how  the  brain allows  us  to  have really  complex  cognitive  functions,  right?  All  right. Okay,  so  then  the  question  is,  how  do  we, how  do  we  really  study these  networks  of  connections  across  the  brain? So  there's  many  types of  connectivity  that  we  can  talk  about. When  we  talk  about  the  brain, I'm  going  to  really  focus  on  three  broad  classes of  methods  that  are  often  used  at  the, at  the  systems  level  of  neuroscience. So  the  first  one  is  structural  connectivity. So  this  is  just  looking  at the  physical  connections  between  brain  regions,  right? This  is  anatomy. You  have  bundles  of  axons connecting  different  regions  of  the  brain. All  right? You  might  measure  this  in  different  ways. You  could  have  cells  in  a  dish  actually. So  you  could  go  at  lower  level. You  could  have  an  animal  model. In  an  animal  model,  e.g. you  could  use  tract  tracing  where  you  use a  virus  and  inject  that  and  then  you can  track  where  it  goes. And  so  you  can  actually  see,  okay, there  must  be  a  bundle  of  fibers. They're  going  from  this  brain  region  to  another. In  humans,  you  can  use a  method  called  diffusion  tensor  imaging, or  DTI,  which  it  really  infers  the  direction  of  axons. But  it  can  give  you  these  beautiful  pictures  that  you might  often  see  on  book  covers and  stuff  like  that  because  they  look  very  pretty. But  the  idea  is  that  you  are  looking  at  structure. So  you're  looking  at  anatomical,  physical  connections. Okay? That's  the  most  concrete  connectivity  to  think  of. The  easiest  to  think about  because  it's  physically,  they're  right. Next,  these  two  are  based  on  function. So  we're  not  looking  at  a  structural  connection. We're  now  looking  at  how  the  activity in  different  regions  of the  brain  interact  with  each  other. So  really  how  the  activity  in different  regions  of  the  brain  change  over  time  together. So  I'll  walk  through  a  little  bit  of this  with  functional  connectivity. So  again,  this  is  not necessarily  reflecting  monosynaptic  connections. What  we're  doing  is  we're  seeing  activity  in one  brain  region  and  how  it relates  to  activity  in  another  brain  region. E.g.  you  have  region  a  and  region  B. And  you  measure  activity  over time  and  you  can  measure  this  in  different  ways. This  could  be  from  EEG, this  could  be  FMRI, this  could  be  neuronal  recordings, just  some  activity  over time  into  different  brain  regions. How  correlated  are  they? Do  they  relate  to  each  other? And  the  idea  is  that  regions  that  are functionally  related  will  be  correlated  with  each  other. Then  with  effective  connectivity, this  is  just  taking  functional  connectivity one  step  further  mathematically. So  let's  say  you  have  regions that  you  think  have  some  functional  connection. And  then  you  can  use  different  mathematical  models to  measure  direction  or  the  flow  of  information. And  the  difference  here is  you're  inferring  directionality. So  information  is  going  from  region  to region  B  as  opposed  to  there  just  highly  correlated. We  don't  know  the  direction. Now,  you  might  say,  well, why  is  everyone  using  functional  connectivity? Wouldn't  you  want  to  go  that  step further  and  always  use  effective  connectivity? Well,  there's  a  lot  of complications  with  these  mathematical  models and  with  the  type  of activity  that  we  are  measuring  from  the  brain, it's  not  always  clear  that  it's giving  you  a  biologically  relevant  answer. So  some  people  use  this  and  try  to make  inferences  and  it's  done. But  it's  not,  it's  not, it's  not  a  perfect  science. Okay,  so  if  I  apply  this  to  my  data, I'm  not  necessarily  going  to  feel  super  confident  that we're  really  measuring this  direction  of  information  necessarily, but  it  is  a  way  to  try  to  get  it  back. Okay? So  structural  connectivity  with  the  physical  connections. Functional  connectivity. Does  the  activity  over  time  in  different  brain  regions correlate  and  effective  connectivity we're  trying  to  infer  directionality. So  I  have  this  little  quiz  yourself,  just  for  fun. So  for  each  of  these  following  scenarios, which  type  of  connectivity  is  being  investigated? And  I  put  numbers  here  so  you  can  throw  your  fingers. So  for  a,  a  scientist  takes correlations  between  fMRI  signals  from different  regions  while  participants  are sleeping  to  see  which  areas  are  interacting. Since  the  structural,  functional  or  effective. See  a  few  hands. There  we  go. Yes,  lots  of  twos, yes,  this  is  functional  connectivity. Be  a  scientist  wants  to  investigate white  matter  pathways  that  connect  areas involved  in  processing  faces  in individuals  who  have  difficulty  recognizing  people. This  structural,  functional  or  effective. Here  we  go  starting  to  see, we  were  looking  at  white  matter, trying  to  investigate  the  white  matter  one,  yes. So  we  have  structural connectivity  because  we're  trying  to look  at  the  actual  white  matter,  the  physical  connection. Okay,  and  finally,  a  scientist's  records  from two  neurons  in  primary  and  secondary  motor  cortex. And  notices  that  the  activity  in primary  motor  cortex  follows the  activity  and  secondary  motor  cortex. They  infer  that  secondary  motor  cortex  is  sending commands  signals  to  primary  motor  cortex? 12  or  three? Yes.  Okay. You  could  also  just  do  CS  is  going  to  be three  effective  connectivity  because we're  thinking  about  the  direction. Okay? Now  there's  many  lectures that  could  be  given  on  each  of  these. But  I,  for  the  rest  of  this  talk, I'm  going  to  focus  on functional  connectivity  because  it's, it's  increasingly  popular  in the  field  of  cognitive  neuroscience. It's  really  had  a  boom  in  the  last  20  years. I  use  it  in  my  lab  in  addition  to  other  methods. But  it's  really  a  great  way  at  getting at  functional  systems  or  networks. Okay? So  in  order  to  understand  this  method, you  just  need  a  little  background  on  MRI  in  general. So  don't  worry  about  the  physics  behind  this. There's  a  whole  field  of  MR. Physics. But  I  think  having  some  really  basic  understanding  helps. Okay. So  first  just  some  background  on  MRI,  right? So  when  we're  when  we're  using fMRI,  that's  functional  MRI. But  this  is  all  based  on  MRI, which  is  just  magnetic  resonance  imaging. So  just  a  little  history. It  was  discovered  in  1946, but  it  wasn't  actually  used clinically  until  the  early  1880s. So  it  took  awhile.  But  you  can  also  think,  well, this  is  a  relatively  new  technology. The  way  it  works  is  you  have  this  tube,  right? So  this  big  machine,  if  anyone's had  an  MRI  for  any  reason, you  may  have  had  land  on  your  knee or  maybe  you  participated  in a  research  study  and  so  you  in  in  one  of  our  departments. And  so  you  had  a  scan  of  your  brain. You  lay  inside  one  of  these  tubes. This  is  showing  a  child  going  inside. And  it's  basically  a  big  magnet. So  in  magnets  are  measured  in  tesla. And  so  often  we'll  have a  three  Tesla  scanner  for  research  purposes. That's  really  the  most  common, is  a  CT  scanner. And  just  to  give  you  some  baseline, one,  tesla  is  about 20,000  times  the  Earth's  magnetic  field. So  it's  a  very  strong  magnet. So  when  you  get  an  MRI, you  don't  want  to  go  in  there  with  any  metal. Because  metal,  let's  say  you  walk  in  with  scissors, it's  going  to  fly  and  stick  to  the  scanner. And  so  someone  is  in  the  scanner  and  scissors are  flying  at  them,  knock  it,  right? So  you  have  to  definitely  d metal  and  do  a  screen  so  that, you  know  it's  safe  to  go  in  there. But  once  you're  in  there  and  you  don't  have metal,  it's  very  safe. Okay. So  with  structural  MRI, you  can  get  out these  really  nice  anatomical  images  of  the  brain. This  is  showing  you  some of  the  different  views  of  the  brain. And  the  idea  is  that  it  works on  different  magnetic  properties of  different  types  of  tissue. Gray  matter,  white  matter,  cerebral  spinal  fluid. They  have  different  magnetic  properties. All  I'll  say  that  much. And  what  that  does  is  you  can  measure  a  signal  and  it allows  you  to  see  the  contrast  between  them. That  allows  you  here  to  see  where  there's  gray  matter, white  matter,  cerebral  spinal  fluid,  etc. Okay. Alright. Now,  when  we  shift  and  think  about  functional  MRI, this  is  quite  different. So  now  we're  not  looking  at  different  tissue  types, but  we're  actually  taking  advantage  of. The  different  magnetic  susceptibility  properties of  oxygenated  versus  deoxygenated  blood. So  neurons  will  fire,  right? With  MRI,  we're  not  directly  recording  neuronal  activity. But  what  we  know  is  that  when  neurons, neurons  fire,  they  require  additional  oxygen. And  so  blood  tends  to  bring  that  oxygen. You  have  this  change  in  blood  flow. And  so  that  change  in  blood  flow  changes  that balance  of  oxygenated  and  deoxygenated  blood. And  given  its  different, different  magnetic  properties,  you can  measure  that  signal. So  it's  a  blood  signal,  basically, what  we  call  it  is the  blood  oxygen  level  dependent  signal or  the  bold  signal. So  when  we  talk  about  fMRI  and  brain  activity, we're  talking  about  the  bold  signal  over  time. Okay? So  it's  an  indirect  measure  of  neuronal  activity. Not  direct.  Okay? And  then  the  important  point  is  right, you  have  someone  in  the  scanner over  a  certain  amount  of  time, like  minutes,  and  you  can  look  at  how  that signal  changes  over  time. We'll  talk  more  about  that. Okay. So  an  MRI  scans, so  the  structural  MRI  and  functional  MRI, the  unit  of  measurement, what  we're  looking  at, the  way  we  divide  up  the  brain  is  in  voxels. So,  you  know,  pixels,  right? Picture  elements. It's  just  like  the  two-dimensional  square, like  on  your  screens. So  you  know  what  kind  of  resolution  you  have. Voxels  are  just  that  in  three-dimensions. So  you  collect  this  image  that's a  whole  volume  of  a  brain,  right? Because  it's  a  three-dimensional  object. And  you  divide  that  into  little  cubes. These  voxels. Alright? In  many  structural  MRI  scans, the  voxels  are  about  1  mm  cubed. Okay? In  fMRI  they  tend  to  be  a  little  bigger. Nowadays  you  can  use  more  like  2  mm, but  it  was  very  common  just  several  years  ago to  use  3  mm,  four  millimeter  voxels. So  when  you  think  about  the  level  of  neuroscience,  right? Think  about,  okay,  we're  looking  at  the  systems  level. Well,  of  course  we  are. A  resolution  is  not  good  enough  to  get  smaller. So  think  about  even  in a  structural  MRI  image  that's  1  mm  cubed. Think  about  how  many  neurons  and glia  are  in  that,  that  voxel. A  lot. And  there's  no  way  every  single  neuron  in that  voxel  is  doing  the  identical  thing. So  in  that  case  we're  not, we  cannot  say  that  we're  studying  what  a  neuron  is  doing. We're  studying  what  the  aggregate that  brain  area  is  doing. Okay?  Okay. So  you  take  into  account  what  your  questions  are, what  your  scientific  questions  are. And  so  if  you  have  a  question about  neurons  at  the  neuronal  level, you're  not  going  to  use  MRI. But  if  you  have  questions  at these  higher-level  maps  systems  level, then  you  can  use  MRI. Okay,  this  is  just  a  two-dimensional  slice  of  the  brain. And  it's  just  showing you  what  this  bold  signal  might  look  like  across  time. And  this  time  is  many  minutes. You  might  take  one  voxel,  right? One  cube  and  say,  okay, let  me  measure  that  bold  signal  over time  and  it'll  look  like  this. Then  another  voxel  might  look  like  this, and  then  outside  the  brain  will  look  like  noise. This  is  often  called  the  time  course  of  activity. There's  a  lot  of  interchangeable  terms  in  this  field. So  you  might  hear  the  bold, bold  activity,  fMRI  activity,  timecourse,  time-series. All  of  this  means  the  same  thing. It  all  means  of  this. Okay? Alright,  now,  when  someone's  in  the  scanner, you  can  have  them  do  a  task. And  this  is  what  people  have  done. For  many  years,  several  decades. With  fMRI,  you  have  someone  do  some  sort  of cognitive  or  behavioral  task  in the  scanner  and  you  measure  activity, which  brain  regions  increased  activity  during  that  task, okay,  that  those  brain  regions must  be  involved  in  that  process. You  could  have  people  do  nothing. And  that  is  what  we  call  resting  state  fMRI. And  so  in  this  case, people  just  lay  in  the  scanner. They  don't  do  any  task. All  right? And  this  is  really  commonly used  for  functional  connectivity. So  that's  why  I'm  going  to  talk  about  it. So  you  have  someone  in  the  scanner  and  you  just  show  them maybe  a  fixation  plus  sign  like  this. And  you  tell  them,  relax, hold  still,  and  stay  awake. Which  is  those  things  are  not  always  easy. Okay.  So  you  want  someone  to  hold  really  still  on the  scanner  and  you  want  them  to  not  fall  asleep. Some  people  get  really  low  in the  scanner  and  we'll  have  a  lot  of  trouble  stay. Okay. So  you  have  someone  just  lay  in the  scanner  doing  nothing. Now,  why  is  this  approach  useful? Well,  you  can  think  about  if  we're studying  certain  populations,  right? It  might  be  hard  to  get certain  populations  to  do  certain  tasks. So  maybe  there  are certain  patient  populations  who have  struggled  with  a  task. Okay,  well  now  you  don't  have  to  ask  them  to  do anything  and  you  can  still  measure  brain  activity. Um,  two  groups  like  kids  and  adults, they  might  be  performing  the  task  differently. And  that's  not  really  what you're  necessarily  carrying  about. Maybe  it  is,  but  if  it's  not, then  you  don't  want  that  compound. So  you  can  basically  measure brain  activity  without  having  any  sort of  task  demands  involved,  which  is  nice. Then  we  just  measure this  activity  here  over  time  while  someone's  resting. So  you  take,  here's  just  a  toy  example. You  have  this  blue  spot  in  the  brain. You  say,  okay,  what  is  that  bold  signal  over  time? Many  minutes  while  they're  just  laying  there. Okay.  So  you  can  see  it  fluctuates  up  and  down. This  is  what  we're  measuring. Okay. Any  questions  at  this  point? All  right. Okay. I'm  going  to  break  this  down  a  little  bit  more. Okay? So  let's  say  you  take  a  brain  region like  this  left  motor  cortex and  you  have  someone  in  the  scanner. Now  let's  say  you're  going  to  ask  them  to  do  a  task. So  you're  going  to  say  eggs  laying  there  and open  and  close  your  hands  for  awhile. Now  stop. Now  open  and  close  your  hands  for  a  while  now  stop. And  then  you  compare  brain  activity  when they're  opening  and  closing their  hands  versus  when  they're  not. And  so  what  would  you  expect? You  expect  increased  activity  in motor  cortex  because  it's  controlling  their  hand. So  you  might  look  at  left  motor  cortex, measure  some  signal  and  it  looks  like  this. Then  now  let's  say,  okay, well  now  let's  measure motor  cortex  activity  in the  other  hemisphere  and  the  right  hemisphere. And  the  activity  looks  like  this. So  you  might  not  be  surprised  that this  activity  in  this  activity  are really  related  to  each  other and  highly  correlated,  right? Because  they're  both  involved  in the  task  and  they're  functionally  related. So  that's  not,  that's  not  incredibly  surprising, that  these  areas  that  are  relevant  to the  task  will  increase  their  activity  together. Now  what  was  surprising  few  decades ago  was  that  if  we have  our  participants  do  nothing  in  the  scanner, so  no  task,  no  opening  and  closing  their  hands. Just  resting  state  fMRI, the  bold  signal  over  time  is  also  highly  correlated. Now  they're  not  doing  anything, but  we  are  measuring that  bold  signal  over time  in  these  two  regions  while  they  just  lay  there. And  it  turns  out  that regions  that  are  functionally  related  to  each other  are  highly  correlated even  when  you're  doing  nothing. So  there's  this  intrinsic  functional  connectivity between  those  regions. Now  there's  regions  that  are  not  functionally related  and  they  do  not have  highly  correlated  activity  at  rest. So  this  is  another  random  region. Its  activity  over  time  is  not  highly  correlated. So  there's  something  about this  resting  state  activity  where  regions  that  are functionally  related  to  each  other and  are  part  of  the  same  system, are  highly  correlated  at  rest. So  here's  a  real  example  of  that. This  is  left  and  right  motor  cortex. This  looks  too  good  to  be  true,  right? Look  how  highly  correlated  they  are, but  this  is  real  data. So  left  and  right  motor  cortex, probably  the  most  reliable  signal. Is  very  functionally  connected  or  highly  correlated. Now,  you  can  do  this  with  two  regions  of  the  brain, but  what  you  can  also  do  is  pick one  spot  and  then  see  where  across the  whole  brain  shows strong  connectivity  are strong  correlations  with  this  region. So  if  we  pick  one  of  them motor  regions  and  you  look  across  the  whole  brain, you  actually  see  strong  correlations with  many  different  motor  regions  throughout  the  brain. So  supplementary  motor  area  or  motor parts  of  the  striatum  and  thalamus  and  cerebellum. You  can  pull  out  these  components  of  a  whole  system. So  this  is  a  large-scale  motor  system. And  so  you  can  see  how  using  this  measure, this  functional  connectivity  approach can  pull  out  a  whole  system. Alright? So  now  you  can  go  a  step  further. You  can  take  a  large  set  of  regions  across the  whole  brain  that  we  know  makes up  these  different  networks  and  systems. And  we  can  correlate the  activity  from  each  region with  every  other  region  of  the  brain. And  then  you  represent  the  data  in a  correlation  matrix  that  looks  like  this. So  the  axes,  this  is  all  the  regions  by  all  the  regions. So  region  by  region. Okay? So  e.g.  this  cell  in  here, this  is  the  functional  connection or  the  correlation  of  activity between  this  yellow  region and  this  blue  light  blue  region. And  so  this  gives  you  an  r  value. How  functionally  related  are  these  two  regions? We  have  a  correlation  matrix  like  this  for  every  subject. So  you  have  a  bunch  of  subjects,  right? Scan  the  other  person,  get  their  data, and  then  you  can  average  them together  across  all  the  people. And  so  when  you  do  this  group  average, you  see  this  nice  structure  pop  out,  right? So  you  see  these  nice  blocks. And  the  brighter  colors  are  stronger  correlations. If  we  have  region  by  region  and we  organize  them  in  a  way  where all  the  regions  that  we  know  belong  to a  particular  system  are  grouped  together. Well,  you  can  see  there's really  strong  correlations  within  every  system. Like  the  visual  system  is  really  strong  correlations between  all  the  regions  that  are part  of  the  visual  system. Then  in  the  off-diagonal,  you  could  just, if  you  want  to  study  how different  networks  interact  with  each  other, you  can  look  at  off-diagonal  blocks. This  often  is  called  the  connectome. If  you've  heard  that  term  when  people  are specifically  talking  about  FMRI, this  is  usually  what  they're  talking  about. We  can  represent  the  interactions or  functional  relatedness  among  the  regions  of  the  brain. We  can  do  things  with  these  data. We  can  take  something  like  graph  theory. And  we  can  take  all  the  regions. We  can  put  them  into  an  algorithm that  groups  together  regions with  high  correlations  with  each other  and  spreads  apart  regions  with  low  correlations. And  you  get  this  graph  that  looks  like  this. And  you  can  see  how  the  different  and all  the  networks  are  colored  accordingly. So  you  can  see  how  the  different  networks,  the  regions, cluster  together  because  they  have strong  connectivity  with  each other  and  not  with  other  networks. We  can  actually  do  this  for  every  single  voxel  as  well. And  so  then  you  can  get, you  can  map  on  these  nice  networks  or  systems  on the  brain  where  each  color  represents  a  certain  network. And  it  really  maps  on  well  to what  we  know  from  animal  work, what  we  know  from  task  FMRI. But  it's  done  with  this  very  simple  approach. Okay,  so  just  to  highlight  some  examples,  e.g. right,  we  have  the  visual  network  back  of the  brain  are  visual  system. But  then  you  can  have  networks that  where  it's  functionally  connected. So  the  activity  over  time  is  correlated, but  they're  not  close  together  in  space,  right? These  regions  are  in  different  places  of  the  brain. You  have  these  yellow  regions  in  many  different  parts, but  they're  all  the  related. This  particular  one  is  called the  frontal  parietal  control  network. It's  involved  in  task  control. So  being  able  to  cognitively  engaged  in  the  task  at  hand, it's  more  of  a  higher  level  cognitive  network. There's  many  networks  like  this. It  can  really  help  us  understand  how  the  brain is  functionally  organized  to support  different  cognitive  functions. And  we  can  take  this  information and  we  can  do  things  with  it  in order  to  study  cognition  and  behavior  in  people. And  we  can  do  things  like  compare  groups. Or  you  could  look  across  development  and  see,  okay, how  does  functional  connectivity  within in-between  these  different  systems change  with  development? And  how  does  that  map  onto  things like  cognitive  development,  right? You  could  compare  a  patient  group  to  a  control  group. So  you  could  take. People  with  schizophrenia  and  people without  and  compare  them  and  see, are  there  certain  networks  that  are  more heavily  altered  in  schizophrenia? You  can  also  do  more  basic  science  questions  like, let's  say  you're  interested  in a  particular  aspect  of  attention. You  can  focus  on  attention  systems  and  maybe how  they  interact  with  processing  systems. Take  our  example  from  before, where  you  are  clearly  engaging  in attention  system  by  focusing  your  attention  on  blue. So  you're  scanning  a  scene  and  you, things  that  are  blue  are  popping  out. Well,  how  does  that  attention  system  interact  or modulate  the  visual  system  to  allow  you  to  do  that. So  there's  cool  things  that  we  can  do  with  this  method. I  just  want  to  finally  talk about  some  of  the  advantages  and disadvantages  of  this  approach, which  is  really  important  to  think about  regardless  of  what  method  you're  talking  about. Okay,  So  at  any  level, you  want  to  think  about  advantages  and  disadvantages. So  first  of  all,  this, and  this  goes  for  all  of  MRI  and  functional MRI  for  research  purposes,  it's  non-invasive. So  yes,  if  you're  claustrophobic, it  might  not  be  that  great  to  lay  in  the  tube. But  if  you're  not,  you're  just  laying  in  there. We're  not  probing  you  with  electrodes. No  one  has  to  cut  into  your  brain,  right? It's  non-invasive. It  can  be  done  in  a  short  amount  of  time. So  you  can  get  someone  in  and  out  of  the  scanner in  about  an  hour  and collect  a  lot  of  great  data  from  them. Which  is  great  if  you're  running an  experiment  with  participants. Having  someone  in  and  out  in  about  an  hour  is  great. Think  about  if  you're  scanning  children, they're  not  going  to  enjoy  being  in  there  so  much. We  can  only  bribe  them  with candy  bars  for  so  long,  which  we  do. Okay,  again,  for  all  of  them  or  you  can measure  merit  many  areas  at  once. So  this  is  what's  different  from  other  levels  of neuroscience  where  you're  actually like  measuring  from  a  neuron. So  like  single  unit  recording  and  animal  models,  right? You  can't  record  from every  neuron  in  the  entire  brain  at  once. You  can  record  from  certain  areas. But  here  we  can  get  the  whole  brain. These  different  methods  can  inform  each  other. So  perhaps  we  find  something  at this  whole  brain  level  that  localizes  to  certain  regions. Then  we  can  say,  oh,  okay, let's  send  that  information  to  people  who  study, who  can  specifically  record  neurons  from  those  regions. Or  let's  say  someone's  studying  things at  the  neuronal  level  that  can inform  our  decision  on  how  we  approach these  whole  brain  questions. Okay? Another  thing  that's  important  is that  functional  connectivity  networks  are actually  really  related  to anatomical  and  task  evoke  networks. So  I'm  just  showing  an  example  here that  illustrates  this  point. So  this  is  data  from  a  macaque  monkey. In  the  first  panel,  a, the  monkey  is  under  under  anesthesia. So  the  monkey  is  out  in  the  scanner and  they're  measuring  resting-state functional  connectivity. And  they're  looking  at  what  regions  are correlated  with  this  region, which  is  the  frontal  eye  fields. So  they  see  this  pattern  of  connectivity  in  panel  B. This  here  they  have  an  awake  monkey  performing  a  task, and  this  is  a  so-called  task, which  is  just  eye  movements. So  they  have  the  monkey  doing an  eye  movement  task  in  the  scanner  and recording  where  in the  brain  activity  increases  during  this  task, the  frontal  eye  fields  are  known  to be  involved  in  eye  movement  and  look, you  get  very  similar  regions. And  then  in  C,  this  is  actually  anatomical  connections. So  this  is  using  a  retrograde  tracer  that shows  you  where  there's connections  from  one  area  to  another. And  you  actually  see  a  very  similar  pattern. So  what  this  is  showing  you  is  that  what correlates  with  an  area  at  rest  is similar  to  the  set  of  regions  that are  actually  activated  during  a  task. And  that's  similar  to  the  set  of  regions that  have  anatomical  connections. So  this  is  important  because  it shows  validity  of  this  method. That's  a  lot  that  can  be simpler  than  these  other  methods. Okay,  Another  point  is  reproducible. These  networks  are  reproducible between  and  within  individuals. So  here's  just  an  example. There's  a  top-down  view  of  just  one  hemisphere, just  the  left  hemisphere. But  they  pulled  out  these  networks  in one  large  sample  and  then  they replicate  it  and  another  large  sample. And  then  they  even  replicate  it  in  a  single-subject. This  doesn't  work  for  all  methods. So  e.g.  DTI,  which  I  talked  about  earlier, this  doesn't  work  for  that  method  very  well. Very  quickly  we  have  three  disadvantages. So  the,  probably  the  biggest  disadvantage  is  it is  extremely  susceptible  to  motion. If  someone  moves  in  the  scanner  even  a  tiny  bit, it  can  cause  a  lot  of  problems. We  knew  this  was  a  problem  for  MRI  in  general. If  someone  moves  a  little  bit  during  a  structural  scan, the  structural  image  is  a  little  blurred, like  the  contrast  between gray  and  white  matter  can  be  blurred. But  it  turns  out  that  it's  a  bigger  problem  than  we thought  for  functional  connectivity  in  particular. So  I  could  go  on  for  hours  and  hours. But  basically,  we  have  ways  to  account  for  this  now, but  it's  very  stringent  processing  methods,  okay? But  it's  something  that  you  have  to  keep  in  mind because  results  are  very  easily, they're  very  susceptible  to  this  motion  artifact. Okay. Another  thing  that's  just  really  a  limitation, just  that  it's  an  indirect  measure of  connectivity,  right? So  we're  not  directly  measuring neurons  are  neuronal  connections. It's  this  indirect  measure. So  you  just  need  to  keep  that  in  mind given  the  questions  that  you're  asking. For  all  FMRI,  there's  a  limited  temporal  resolution. We're  measuring  on  the  order of  seconds,  not  milliseconds. Eeg  can  measure  more  milliseconds, but  it's  just  another  limitation. You  can't  ask  very  precise  temporal  questions, but  you  can  ask  more  precise spatial  questions  where  things  are. And  then  finally,  of  course, which  you've  heard  probably  many  times  before, that  correlation  is  not  causation. So  let's  say  we  have  two  areas that  are  functionally  connected,  right? So  their  activity  over  time  is  highly  correlated. Well,  do  they  directly  influence  each  other? Or  is  there  some  third  factor? Is  there  a  third  brain  region  that's  influencing both  of  them  and  making  them,  their  activity  correlated? Or  is  there  some  sort  of  artifact  or  a  compound  like movement  that  could  be  influencing  their  connectivity. And  so  this  is  just  a  comic  that  I  think  is  cute. It's  on  the  slides  so  you  can  read  it  at  some  point. Okay. It  looks  like  we're  out  of  time. This  is  just  a  summary  which you  will  have  on  your  slides. And  so  if  there's  any  questions, I'm  happy  to  answer. Okay. Anyone  with  questions? Okay.
