Recording. All  those  things  with  the  spring  quarter  stippled are  very  difficult  to  work  with,  accommodate. People  have  pre-recorded  lectures  throughout  the  border. Now  there's  gonna  be  a  question  as to  whether  you  would  like just  the  pre-recorded  burden or  you  would  like  to  find  version  of  the  pre-recorded. So  like  when  I  gave  the  previous  block  that  some  of you  that'll  be  asked  in  your  section. So  think  about  it  and  maybe  give  an  answer  session  today, however,  here,  very  happy. Very  overworked  professor  has  a  live  talk. So  I'm  Professor  Andrea  is  a  professor  of  piano, size  of  departments  and  the  neurosciences  program. Dr.  Shiva  works  on  a  number  of different  things  I  could  do  affect  memory, learning  using  a  number  of  things  and  lots  of  protected. Today,  we'll  be  talking  about beer  and  your  circuits  in  the  brain. Hi,  Thank  you  for  having  me  here. You  guys  are  lucky  you  have  one  of  the  departments, best  professors  here  to  keep  us  all  in  line, showing  up  for  our  talks. So  today  I'm  gonna  talk  about  fear  and  neural  circuits. And  the  truth  is  this,  I  don't  study fear  in  my  laboratory, but  I  do  study  many  of  the  circuits underlying  fear  for  different  reasons. But  the  circuitry  has  been best  worked  out  with  respect  to  fear. And  so  I  wanted  to  give  you  an  example of  a  topic  where  the  scientific, it's  socially  relevant,  very  socially  relevant. The  scientific  community  dug  into this  topic  and  they  really  made  some  headway. They  really,  they  really  understood the  neural  circuits  underlying  this,  this  issue. And  they  went  ahead  and people  are  working  on  therapeutics. I  wanted  to  give  it  as  a  good  example  of a  socially  relevant  topic  where science  advanced  things  because it  doesn't  always  happen  that  way. So  this  is  a  very  old  example. And  do  people  recognize  what  this  is? Okay?  So  responses  have  changed  over  the  years. Now  in  this  era  I  just  show  and  it's  like, does  anyone  even  recognize  this? When,  when  I  first  put  a  lecture  together,  unfair, actually,  people  would  be having  a  physiological  response  to  seeing  this. Because  they  actually  been  around  at  the  time it  happened  and  knew  how  devastating  it  wasn't, how  many  changes  occurred  in  society  as  a  result. And  so  this  was  when  planes  crashed  into  the  Twin  Towers. It  ended  up  being  a  flashbulb  memory. For  sum,  that's  a  memory  where  things  are  so affectively  Laden  that  society  holds  this  shared  memory. A  lot  of  details  get  lost  in  that, but  people  retain  the  memory  itself  better. But  for  people  that  were  actually  in the  twin  towers  at  the  time  that  happened, you  can  imagine  that  it  had a  devastating  impact  in  terms  of  deaths, but  in  a  very  devastating  impact in  terms  of  those  that  lived  through  it. And  so  many  actually develop  post-traumatic  stress  disorder. And  we'll  talk  about  that,  what  that  entails. And  this  was  a  woman  who  worked  for one  of  the  financial  firms,  Cantor  Fitzgerald. She  was  trapped  inside  the  Twin  Towers, but  she  actually  survived. And  she,  but  afterwards  she  described  that  in  her  dreams. She  hears  calls  for  help from  people  trapped  in  the  offices. The  bond  firm  that  lost more  than  600  employees and  in  the  windows  of  the  World  restaurant, which  are  occupied  the  top  floor. So,  you  know,  her  life  was  not  the  same. She  continued  to  hear  the  event  while  she  was  dreaming, perhaps  while  she  was  awake. The  memories  and  the  trauma  were  pervasive. And  so  actually  in  this  case, I'm  gonna  give  you  a  definition  of post-mitotic  Post-Traumatic  Stress  Disorder from  Wikipedia  and  even  tell  you, it's  fine  to  go  to  Wikipedia  in this  instance  because  Joe  LeDoux  and colleagues  from  New  York  University  who are  the  leaders  were  actually  the  ones  that  put  this  up. So  post-traumatic  stress  disorder,  or  PTSD, is  the  term  for  a  severe  and  ongoing  emotional  reaction to  an  extreme  psychological  trauma. So  we  can  all  have  trauma and  people  can  experience  trauma  effects. But  if  it  is  persistent, that  becomes  an  issue. So  the  latter,  the  psychological  trauma  may  involve someone's  actual  death  or  threat  to the  patients  or  someone  else's  life, serious  physical  injury, or  threat  to  physical  or  psychological  integrity, to  a  degree  that usual  psychological  defenses  or regulatory  capacities  are  incapable  of  coping. It's  important  to  make  a  distinction between  PTSD  and  traumatic  stress, which  is  similar  but  have  less  intensity  and  duration. And  from  there,  there  are  a  lot  of  PTSD  symptoms. They  can  include  nightmares,  flashbacks, emotional  detachment, feelings  of  none,  numbness,  insomnia. They  can  also  include  something that's  very  interesting  with respect  to  associative  learning, which  is  like  an  over-generalization  of  surrounding  cues. What  do  I  mean  by  that? Well,  you  can  imagine  that  the  sounds  of planes  preceding  the  crash probably  made  a  big  impact as  a  cue  in these  people's  heads  that  survived  in  their  brains. So  possibly  every  time  someone  hears  a  plane  overhead, then  it  becomes  a  big  stressor  because  it's associated  with  this  traumatic  event and  they  may  overgeneralize, just  regular  planes  flying. They  may  overgeneralize. Sounds  buzzing  at  the  same  frequency as  the  sound  is  given  off  by  the  planes. So  in  one  instance, what  I  mean  about  the  over-generalization  perspective, there  was  a  soldier  in  there, a  lot  of  people  coming  back  from  tours  in the  military  with  PTSD  because they  experience  or  or witness  traumatic  events  all  the  time. And  so  it's  a  big,  big  societal  problem  ongoing. It's  not  just  these  big  events, It's  events  ongoing  for  many  people  all  the  time. And  that's  true  for people  who  are  attacked  on  the  streets, et  cetera,  et  cetera  to. But  anyway,  to  get  back  to  an  example from  one  particular  soldier  that  this  happened  to. It  happened  to  be  that  there  was an  explosion  and  it  was  coming from  it  was  a  bomb  coming  from  a  metal  canister that  made  it  clink  sound  first  and  then  exploded. And  he  had  friends  that  were actually  killed  in  that  explosion  and  really  decimated. And  so  later,  he  was suffering  with  PTSD  to  a  great  extent. And  he  was  just  walking  down the  street  and  a  car  actually crashed  into  a  curb  in the  hub  cap  came  off  and  it  made  a  loud  sound. And  this  guy  was  seen  hitting  the  ground  and  rolling, and  rolling  under  a  car. And  he  really  thought  he  was  in  wartime  at that  point  because  he  was so  salient  that  it actually  took  him  back  to  the  traumatic  event. That's  what  we  mean  by  PTSD. It  can  be  more  subtle. And  now  there  are  many  definitions  of PTSD  which  involve  this. Has  PTSD  based  on a  traumatic  instance  that  I'm  talking  about  there other  categorizations  that  come  from  people  who've  had chronic  instability  and  too  much  uncertainty and  the  lack  of  safety  in  their  lives. And  that's  another  category  called  complex  PTSD. So  in  this  sort  of  PTSD from  a  single  instance  that  I'm  talking  about. Motivation  and  emotion  are  inherently  interconnected, interconnected  with  action,  reason  and  decision-making. And  this  system  gets  perturbed. So  I  want  to  tell  you  a  little  bit  about how  this  happens  from  a  theoretical  perspective, from  a  neural  perspective, and  then  give  some  examples  from  the  current  research. Let's  talk  about  the  autonomic  nervous  system  first. You  may  have  had  some  experience  with  this. This  is  interesting  lighting  here. It's  not  quite  working. Hopefully  you  can  see  that. But  there's  a  sympathetic  division  of the  nervous  system  and the  parasympathetic  decision  division. And  it's  notable  to everyone  that  the  brain  and body  are  entirely  interconnected. This  idea  that  the  brain  is  some  master  controller  of the  body  without  feedback  happening  from  the  body. As  a  real  old  notion. These  systems, although  they  go  from  the  brain  to  the  body, also  come  back  up  and  dive  into structures  of  the  brain  and the  sympathetic  division  of the  nervous  system  you  may  have  heard  about because  that's  associated  with things  like  fight  or  flight. It  arouses  you,  wakes  you  up  in  the  morning, it  gets  you  running, it  gets  you  out  of  dangerous  situations. One  morning,  I  was  driving  to work  and  there  was  a  young  woman  with a  ponytail  and  Starbucks and  a  cell  phone  driving  a  big  white  vehicle. And  I  thought,  oh,  that's  the  new  avoid  a  predator  model. That  person  was  like swerving  length  while  talking,  drinking, and  then  also  eating  a  bagel and  starting  to  put  makeup  on  wealth  driving. And  I  was  like,  Whoa,  okay. I  feel  like  I'm  under  assault  and  I  got a  big  sympathetic  nervous  system  response  and switched  lanes  and  got  away  and  got away  fast  before  she  moved  right  into  my  lane. And  so  we  still  activate  these  things. We  may  not  be  avoiding  being  eaten  by  a  bear. But  there's  still  modern  things  that  are predators  that  make  us  move  quickly  and  act  quickly. On  the  other  hand, how  do  you  come  down  from  that  after  something  happens, that  it  makes  you  get  more  aroused  and  move  quickly. Well,  that's  your  autonomic  system, your  parasympathetic  nervous  system. And  the  parasympathetic  branch  of  the  nervous  system  is involved  in  what  we  call  housekeeping  functions. And  so  it  calms  down all  the  activations  that the  sympathetic  nervous  system  has. So  you  get  this  idea  of  fight or  flight  and  rest  and  digest  as  they  say. But  the  truth  is,  is  the  two  are  always working  imbalanced  to  try  to  regulate us  and  keep  us  in  a  zone  where  we  can function  optimally  for  the  task  at  hand. This  regulating  those  systems is  something  that  happens  in, in  fear  and  in  PTSD  over  time. And  so  that's  a  topic  also. So  we  have  these  structures  in the  brain  that  are  involved in  effect  of  associative  learning. They  get  all  sorts  of  labels on  them,  psychological  labels. But  the  truth  is, is  the  brain  functions  the  way  the  brain  functions. And  then  we  impose  these  labels  on  the  brain. That's  not  necessarily  what  the  brain  does. That  that  just  means  that these  psychological  functions  that  we impose  activate  those  circuits  in  the  brain. Okay? But  in  this  case, so  they'll  call  this  the  desire  and  reward  circuits. As  mentioned,  people  map  these  functions, but  that  doesn't  mean  that  that's  what  they  do. That  said,  the  amygdala,  which  is  central, actually  is  something  that's involved  in  our  associations  with  outcomes. So  it's  a  structure  that  allows  us  to associate  a  queue  with  something  good and  associate  a  cute  with  something  horrible. Okay?  The  prefrontal  cortex, the  nucleus  accumbens  just  up  from  the  amygdala, is  a  structure  that  we  used  to  think was  involved  in  all  things  good  because  it was  activated  in  people  taking  drugs  of abuse  where  they  took  cocaine  and  it  was  like  on  fire. But  it  turns  out  that  it's  also  involved in  associations  with  things  that  are  bad  also. And  then  their  structures  like  substantia  nigra, which  produce  dopamine,  and  the  ventral  tegmental  area. And  there's  the  anterior  cingulate, which  is  part  of  the  frontal  cortex. I  don't  have  a  pointer,  sorry. That  is  right  over  the  courts  corpus callosum  there  and  then  the  prefrontal  cortex. It  turns  out  that  the  balance  between the  amygdala  and  the  prefrontal  cortex  are  going  to be  very  important  to  actually. So  there's  some  neural  structures that  are  important  in  emotion. You  can  see  the  hippocampus,  the  amygdala, and  the  prefrontal  cortex  are  there  again, along  with  a  lot  of  other  players. And  we're  just  going  to  boil  it  down  today  to talking  more  about  the  amygdala. Thank  you  so  much. Sorry,  I  my  pointer  burnt-out  at  some  point. And  at  some  point. So  anyway,  the  amygdala is  not  a  yellow  structure  in  the  brain. But  one  thing  is  of  note  here, and  that  is  that the  amygdala  is  right next  to  a  structure  called  the  hippocampus. And  I  don't  know  if  you've  had  a  lecture  on the  hippocampus  yet  and  its  role  in  learning  and  memory. Has  that  happened  yet?  The  hippocampus, the  hippocampus  twice  removed. If  I  took  this  person, this  virtual  person,  and exit  out  the  hippocampus  from  their  brain. They'd  be  unable  to  consolidate  new  memories. There's  the  punchline. So  hippocampus  is  very  important  in  memory  consolidation. Not  what  we're  talking  about  today. We're  talking  about  the  amygdala. With  the  amygdala  being attached  to  the  hippocampus  anatomically  makes great  sense  because  it's  involved  in  sort  of salience  and  affect  and  effect  of  associations. And  there  it  is  right, attached  to  the  structure  involved  in  memory. Because  we  want  to  remember  what  gets  us  good  things, what  gets  us  bad  things. However,  this  connection  can  be  like  a  hyper  freeway. If  you  decide  you're  going  to  make  something  traumatic to  because  you're  going to  very  well  in  print  that  in  memory. Okay,  So  what  research  has  been done  on  the  amygdala  and  effect  tons? But  in  terms  of  things  you  might  have  heard  of, that  it's  involved  in, it's  involved  in  fear  conditioning. So  when  a  stimulus  gets  associated with  something  and  that, that's  bad  and  that  elicits  fear, okay,  enhancement  of  emotional  memories. So  that  little  extra, something  that  boosts  memories  that  are  emotional. We  all  have  memories  that  we  remember  fondly  and  we remember  superiorly  to  our  regular  mundane  memories. And  then  recognition  of  emotional  facial  expressions. The  amygdala  has  actually like  really  underactive  and  psychopaths. That's  an  interesting  topic. And  then  amygdala  is  involved  in all  sorts  of  addictions,  including  sex  addictions. Okay,  so  there  it  is  in  its  glory in  what  we  call  a  coronal  section. That  means  sliced  the  brain  down  this  way. This  is  about  spatially, if  I  were  to  go  through  my  temporal  lobe here  and  take  about  that  section  and  I  went  boom, slice  down  that  way. That's  the  view  it's  giving  us. That  there  is  outline  of  the  amygdala. You  can  right  behind that  is  what  you  call  the amygdala  hippocampus  transition  zone. So  what  good  is  that relative  to  what  we  were  talking  about? Okay,  So  let's  take the  classic  event  where  people  talk  about  the  amygdala. Here  we  are,  we're  walking  along, we're  taking  a  nice  hike. We  see  the  rattlesnake. Okay,  So  all  of  a sudden  that  information  is  going to  activate  the  amygdala. It's  going  to  take  a  couple  anatomical  routes. The  visual,  the  visual  image is  going  to  go  to  the  visual  thalamus. That's  an  area  that  integrates sensory  information  straight  down  to  the  amygdala. It's  also  going  to  go  to  the  visual  cortex. Truth  is,  it's  gonna  go  few  other  places  too, but  we're  not  going  to  talk  about  that  today. It's  also  going  to  go  look, the  amygdala  gets  to  project  straight  downstream. And  what  it's  gonna  do  is  actually  go  through  a  hub  here, the  nucleus  is  solitary  tract, which  has  direct  projections  to  our  heart, our  lungs,  our  gut. And  it  will  wager  as  sympathetic  nervous  system  response. What  does  that,  what  does  that  mean? I'm  heart  rate's  going  to  accelerate. We're  going  to  breathe  more  rapidly. That  means  we  can  get  more  blood  to  our  feet  or  brain. We  can  get  more  oxygen so  our  brain  can  function  superiorly. And  we're  going  to  shut  our  gut  down  so  that  it  doesn't process  the  food  because  that's a  waste  of  metabolic  energy. Okay,  So  that  would  be the  sympathetic  response  to  the  snake. Unless  you're  really  excited  about rattlesnakes  and  then  you  might  have  entirely  a  response, but  that's  a  different  conversation. Okay,  So  in  that  case, you're  having  central  control of  these  physiological  responses, meaning  your  brain  is  going  to elicit  illicit,  that's  a  new  word. Elicit  a  cascade  of physiological  responses  in  the  body  that are  going  to  allow  you  to  move  quickly. So  I  gave  you an  oversimplified  view  of what  the  amygdala  is  communicated  with. So  let's  think  of  some  other  inputs  and  outputs. The  medulla  is  not  just  one  structure, we  talk  about  it  that  way, but  it's  actually  a  collection  of  nuclei. What's  kinda  cool  about  this  from  a  cog  psi  perspective, I'm  not  sure  if  you've  had  like  neural  nets  talks  yet. No,  I'm  really  hitting  the  wrong  side  point  years,  sorry. But  you  have  a  network  of structures  that  communicate  with  each other  and  not  gives an  opportunity  for  learning  even  within  the  structure, it's  about  something  we  call  recursion. So  that  it  can,  you  can  learn  within  a  structure  even. Okay?  But  we  have  some  inputs  and  outputs. We  get  visual  input  in  there. We  get  all  the  sensory  input like  taste,  smelling,  hearing, we  get  motor  input  and  from the  striatum  and  it  all  goes  through the  frontal  lobes  and  the  brain in  the  neocortex  and  also  down  to  the  brainstem. So  some  people  call  that  the  high  road  and  the  low  road. It's  going  to  where  are more  higher-order  cognitive  functions  are, and  it's  going  straight  down the  brainstem  to  the  body  too. So  there  are  a  couple  of  roads  of  travel. So  the  thalamus  itself  is an  area  that  receives all  the  sensory  input  from  the  environment. And  it  projects  to  the  amygdala. Also,  it  sends  sensory  information to  other  parts  of  the  brain  as  well. So  that's  about  there. So  now  I've  given  you  a  big  story,  some  definitions. I  meandered  a  little  bit, and  then  I  gave  a  whole  bunch  of  neuroanatomy. So  let's  think  about  how  this  comes  together. So  this  is  sort  of  the  thought  process that  some  of  the  scientists  went  through  when  they decided  to  attack  this  problem  with  respect to  nailing  down  the  neuroanatomy  of  fear. Like,  okay,  we  have these  structures  that  are  involved  in  associations. We  know  that  we  have these  structures  involved  in  sensory  processing. We  have  these  structures  involved  in  action. And  we  have  these  societal  problems like  post-traumatic  stress  disorder. How  are  we  going  to  understand  this? And  so  Joe,  do  you  want  colleagues  and many  others  also  came  through and  they're  like  We  are  going  to  nail  down the  basic  fear  circuitry  in  the  brain  and  we're  going  to figure  out  how  to  understand  how  emotions  are  laid  down. And  in  this  case,  they  were  ill  founded  because  they  were really  just  discovering  how  fear  is  laid  down. And  we're  going  to  try  to  help. So  you're  like,  okay, we're  going  to  play  a  tone and  we're  going  to  shock  some  rats  afterwards. Not,  not  such  a  nice  thing  to  do  actually, I'm  not  a  big  fan  of  that. They're  probably  less  intensive  ways  can  do  spirit. But  on  the  other  hand, people  who  end  up  with  PTSD  go through  these  very  threatening  situations. And  we're  gonna  assume that  tone  goes  through  the  auditory  thalamus. So  first  thing  is  that  town, and  it  was  true  if  you  inactivate the  auditory  thalamus  that the  animals  don't  get  the  tone  representation. And  then  it's  gonna  go  to the  auditory  cortex,  another  spot. If  you  leave  the  thalamus  in place  and  you  inactivate  auditory  cortex, there's  a  problem  processing  the  tone. But  there  were  like  Wait, these  animals  are  still  getting  the  fear  association. So  let  me  talk  about  this  a  little  more. So  then  there  was  the  foot  shock  that  the  animals experienced  in  their  life  that point  through  somatosensory  thalamus. They  did  the  same  sort  of  inactivation techniques  to  figure  it out  then  to  somatosensory  cortex  and  they're  like  a-ha. All  these  structures  converge  on  the  lateral  amygdala. So  they're  like,  I  bet  this  is the  site  where  the  fear  is  getting  associated. And  there's  the  output  through the  central  nucleus  of  the  amygdala  that  projects down  to  all  these  nuclei that  are  involved  in  what  we  see, the  behaviors  we  see elicited  from  an  animal  who's  fearful. So  like  increases  in  blood  pressure  and  heart  rate, increases  in  hormones, and  increases  in  what  they  call  freezing. That's  not  being  cold. But  what  it  is,  is  an  animal when  under  threat  or  even  humans, will  go  and  stop  and  they  won't  move. Because  there  instead  of  like, oh  my  gosh,  if  I  move  I  might  get  eaten. Alright. So  let's  talk  about  the  fear  conditioning  paradigm. They  use  behaviorally  to  parse  all  these  brains. What  they  did  was  they  put  an  animal  in  a  chamber, and  this  is  a  classic  like  Skinnerian  chamber. The  animal  has  no  control  over  their  environment. Things  just  happen  and  things  happen  in  association. In  this  case,  they  played  a  sound. When  they  played  the  sound, the  rat  was  like,  What's  that  sound? And  their  blood  pressure  was  kind  of  on  the  low  side. And  this  says  substation  of  movement. That  means  how  often  do  they  stop  moving? They  didn't  stop  moving  much. They're  roaming  around. Gosh. I  think  I  lost  my  microphone  speaking  of  the  sound. Sorry,  I  got  too  excited  about  the  rat. Alright,  so  they're  going  around, what's  the  sound,  What's  the  sound? And  then  in  a  separate  trial, they  went  ahead  and  they  played the  sound  and  they  actually  gave  a  foot  shock  to  the  rat. Then,  then  in  that  case, the  route  was  like their  blood  pressure  shot  up  and  they  froze. They  stopped  moving. Okay.  And  then  later  they  played  the  sound. So  in  this  phase  occurred  many  times. They  played  the  sound  and  then  shock  the  rat, played  the  sound  and  shock  the  rat. And  this  is  the  responsivity  they  got. Later,  they  played  the  sound  alone. And  instead  of  getting  this  response, which  is  sound  alone  response, they  got  the  response  that  you  get  to  the  foot  shock, which  is  increase  in  bloodshed,  sorry, blood  pressure  and  a  lot  of  freezing  behavior, cessation  of  movement  was  high. The  sound  alone  now  was  as  good  as  a  shock. So  if  you  think  about  it, we  all  condition  up  to  things  all  the  time,  right? If  you  here  if  you're  home  at a  certain  time  and  you're  expecting your  roommate  and  you  hear  the  front  door  open, you  expect  your  roommate  to  walk  in  these  cues. It  create  expectancies. If  I  came  in  with  a  big  stack  of  white  papers, you  probably  would  get an  immediate  slight  stress  response. You  wouldn't  be  expecting  a  handout  in  this  day  and age  because  we  don't  give  handouts  anymore. Anything's  on,  everything's  on the  Internet  that  you  need  to  read,  right? So  you  might  be  expecting  a  test though  if  you  saw  a  big  stack  of  white  papers. So  just  that  big  stack  of  white  papers may  elicit  a  minor  heart  rate  increase. So  we  learn  to  associate  cues  with  their  outcomes. And  so  this  is  how  they  conditioned  fear  in animals.  So  what's  that? Did  the  route  have  PTSD? Was  it  a  persistent  state? Did  it  with  a  chronic? Did  it  persist? Well,  let's,  let's  find  out. So  actually  then  they  took the  rat  through  extinction  trials. So  several  times  they  played. So  when  they  put  the  rat  in the  box  the  next  day  actually, and  they,  they  played  the  tone. The  rat  had  the  same  response. They  froze  excessively,  and  then  they  stopped  moving. But  then  they  went  through  many, many  trials  of  playing  the  sound  alone  with  no  shock. And  what  they  found  was  that  blood  pressure went  back  down  and  they  started  to  move  around  again. So  they  they  lost  that  association. So  it  seemed  behaviourally between  the  tone  and  the  shock  that  the  tone  was  okay. Again,  the  tone  didn't  hold the  value  of  the  shock  for  them  anymore. They  began  to  try  to  understand  extinction. And  I  might  add  that  there  were subset  of  rats  for  whom  this  didn't  happen. And  wisely,  the  lab  doing  the  experiments saved  the  brains  of  those  rats  for  later  evaluation. Okay.  So  the  condition  that  question  came  about. Let's  go  ahead  and  see  what  happens  here. So  here's  a  classic  fear extinction  paradigm  where  they  put animals  through  conditioning  and  they  had  two  groups. And  then  they  extinguished  one  on  day  one. So  they  took  these  group, they  had  a  high  percentage  of  freezing, sorry  for  not  explaining the  axes  that's  teaching  one-to-one. So  this  is  now  instead  of cessation  of  movement  which  we  had  before, which  was  stopping  moving, they  now  have  the  appropriate  term  freezing. So  how  much  are  the  animal's  freezing? So  first,  when  they  put  them  in  the  chamber, this  is  the  habituation  phase. They  moved  around  a  lot. They  weren't  freezing  at  all. Then  when  they  started  conditioning  at  first, they  were  still  moving  around. And  then  once  they've conditioned  the  tone  to  mean  foot  shock, the  animals  were  freezing  at  a  high  percentage. Then  they  started  extinction  trials, which  means  they  played  the  tone  alone  and the  animals  started  moving  to  the  tone  again  over  trials. Okay.  So  then  that  was  day  one. On  day  two,  they  put the  animals  back  on  and  they  had  two  groups  of  animals. A  group  that  we're  conditioned that  went  through  extinction, and  this  group  with  the  open  bars that  did  not  go  through  extinction. And  so  on  day  two, when  they  put  the  animals  back  in, the  group  that  had  gone  through  extinction  in the  dark  circles  showed a  little  bit  of  retention  of  the  fear  memory. And  then  this  is  playing  tone  alone. Then  started  just  moving  around  like  it  was  normal. The  group  that  had  not  gone  through extinction  retain  that  fear memory  and  began  to extinguish  over  trials  of  tone  alone  on  day  two. So  then  they  had  hypotheses. There  are  a  couple  of  competing  hypotheses  at  that  time. And  the  question  was  the  following. We  might  ask  that  question. Are  they  unlearning  the  association  or is  something  overriding  that  association? That  was  a  big  question. They're  like,  well,  some  of  the  animals, a  few  didn't  unlearn  the  association  for  the  most  part, it  looks  like  they're  unlearning  was  the  thought, but  then  other  groups  were  like, No,  they're  overriding  it. Remember  there's  this  interesting  balance between  the  amygdala  and  the  prefrontal  cortex, where  the  amygdala  projects  to the  body  and  it  projects  up  to  the  prefrontal  cortex. And  then  areas  of  the  prefrontal  cortex  project back  down  to  the  amygdala. What  if  that  downstream  projection  for the  prefrontal  cortex  is  actually  inhibiting  that  memory. So  Milan  cork  in  the  early  2000s, went  ahead  and  said,  Okay, this  area  in  for  limbic  in  the  prefrontal  cortex  of the  rat  actually  projects  down  to  the  amygdala. We're  going  to  record  in  animals. We  are  going  to  record activity  in  that  area  while  we  record  from the  amygdala  and  we're  going  to see  where  the  association  is. So  they  went  ahead  and  they  recorded  in  both  regions. And  what  they  found  was  that  there  were  single  units. These  are  cells  that  fire. If  you're  listening  to  them, seem  to  learn  the  association between  the  tone  and  the  fear. And  it  was  represented  in the  lateral  amygdala  the  way  they  thought  it  was. Okay. However,  when  they  went  through  extinction  trials, those  cells  were  still  firing  the  same. So  those  cells  that  learned  were  still  firing  the  same. They  didn't  seem  to  unlearn. However,  when  they  recorded  in  the  limbic  region, what  they  found  was  those  cells  that  learned. Those  that  the  Olympic  cells,  sorry, started  learning  during  extinction, not  during  conditioning. So  they  started,  their, their  assumption  was,  oh, these  cells  are  essential  in  this  representation, is  actually  essential  to inhibiting  the  representation  in  amygdala. These  are  the  cells  that differentially  fire  in  extinction  trials. And  so  what  they  found  was  when  they, well,  I  don't  want  to  give  the  punchline  away  to  sing. Let  me  take  you  through  the  data. So  they  took  a  group  of  animals and  they  habituated  them  and  base  a  minute  to  groups. And  they  conditioned  them  both  up  to  be  fearful. And  then  they  extinguished  them  both. But  one  of  these  groups  had actually  had  a  ventral  medial  prefrontal  cortex  lesion in  one  group  had  not, the  group  in  the  dark  had had  a  ventral  medial  prefrontal  cortex  lesion. And  so  what  happened  with  those  animals  was, oh,  they  extinguished  fine  too. And  they're  like,  Wait,  what's  the  problem  here? But  you  know  what?  They  did  that within  a  day  with  no  delay. When  you  impose  the  delay. They  looked  like  animals  that  hadn't  been  extinguished. So  every  day  that  fear  memory had  to  be  extinguished  again. And  so  that  firing  actually  maintained  the  fear  memory. And  likely  there  was a  way  that  it  inhibited  the  amygdala  to, that's  still  being  worked  out. But  it  seems  like  it's  actually  going  through another  set  of  nuclei  and turning  down  the  gain  on  the  amygdala, the  ventral  medial  prefrontal  cortex actually  has  a  way  of like  silencing  the  amygdala  fear  response. And  so  they're  like,  how  much  does  this  relate  to  humans? So  they  did  human  fear  conditioning  studies. We're  very  similar  and  they  found amygdala  activation  in  early  acquisition, amygdala  activation  during  extinction. And  then  they  started  looking  also at  the  ventromedial  prefrontal  cortex. And  they  took  subjects  that  just  had  unpaired  stimuli, and  then  they  had  fear  stimuli. And  they  looked  at  the  structures  that were  actually  activated  in  the  brain  during  fear  stimuli. And  they  found  this  is the  ventral  medial  prefrontal  cortex  in  humans. So  in  this  case,  in  the  brain, If  I  were  to  like  go  through  about  here  right  behind the  eye  orbits  and  slice  down this  way  and  then  direct  you  to  the  middle. That's  where  that  activation  is. Ventromedial  prefrontal  cortex. And  they  found  that  that  area, the  degree  of  recruitment  in  that  area, actually  lead  to  retention  of  extinction. So  that  meant  that  on  day  two, how  much  were  they  going  to  remember  extinction? So  this  is  different  measurements  than  the  last  steady. Apologies  for  not  pointing  that  out, but  this  is  now  not  freezing  behavior. It's  actually  retention  of  extinction. And  so  there  were  some  brain  changes. So  then  they  decided  to  actually, a  couple  of  things  happen. Sorry. The  lab  that  had recorded  in  the  fear  conditioning  studies  went  back  and started  looking  at  the  brains  of  all  the  animals  that  had failed  to  extinguish  appropriately  on  day  two. And  they  found  that  they  naturally  had a  smaller  volume  in  for  limbic  or,  or  prefrontal  cortex. Smaller  volume. Then  people,  and  they thought  these  might  be  kind  of a  model  of  PTSD,  we  wonder. And  then  they  started  looking  at  brain  changes  in PTSD  patients  with  these  regions  of  interests. And  they  found  that  actually they  had  baseline  more  amygdala  activation. They  had  some  changes  in  the  amygdala  volume, which  were  strange  because  they  could  be  higher  or  lower. So  that  was  confusing. They  had  decreased  hippocampal  volume, decreased  nucleus  accumbens,  which  is  another  area. And  overall,  they  had  some  decrease in  the  activation  of  hippocampus. They  had  this  area  of  the  cingulate  actually  lighting  up, but  they  also  had  decreased  volume  of this  ventral  medial  prefrontal  cortex  area  in humans  and  decreased  activation. Whereas  this  area  had  increased, this  area  sends  you kind  of  internal  versus  this  as  sort  of  your, your  inhibitory  control  on  your  megawatts. So  it's  very  interesting because  what  they  discovered  then  was  like,  Oh, we  found  these  changes  in  subjects  where  they actually  have  a  change  or  heightened  amygdala  activation. And  they  don't  have much  downstream  control  over  it  because they  have  lower  ventral medial  prefrontal  cortex  activation. So  you  can  kind  of  think  of  these  as sort  of  an  aspect  of  power  couple, in  this  case,  amygdala and  ventromedial  prefrontal  cortex. They  need  to  balance  each  other. And  in  this  case,  this  balance  was  lost and  the  amygdala  was  taken  along  with  that  fear  memory. Whereas  the  ventral  medial  prefrontal  cortex  was not  retaining  the  extinction  memory  very  well. And  so  they  thought  this  was  part  of  the  basis  for  PTSD. The  other  thing  that  is a  larger  conversation  is the  decrease  in  hippocampal  volume. Because  Hippocampus  allows  you to  reconsolidate  memories  and so  that  you  can actually  interfere  with  the  fear  memories  tail. So  what  does  this  tell  us  then? Well,  with  respect  to  extinction, and  this  is  way  too  much  text  on  the  slides, but  I  wanted  you  to  have  this  for  future. The  extinction  of  the  fear  represents  either  new  learning or  a  reduction  in  the  salience  of  old  Faire  memories. It's  not  an  unlearning, it's  an  opposition  of  that  learning. Then  research  from  the  quick  lab actually  demonstrates  that  extinction is  mediated  by  the  limbic  area  of  the  prefrontal  cortex. The  same  line  of  work  and rats  actually  translated  to  humans  really  well. And  neurons  in  the  region actually  represent  differential  responding. So  recording  from  neurons  doing neuroimaging  studies  to  corroborate  to  and working  between  rats  and  humans  can get  you  to  a  point  where  you  can  begin to  understand  every  aspect  of the  system  that  might  be  involved  in  something  like  this. So  now,  there  are  a  lot  of therapeutic  targets  that  have  been developed  as  a  result  of  this  work. One  thing  that  they  found, if  we  go  back  to. If  we  go  back  to  this, one  thing  that  they  found  is that  there's  a  90  minute  period  following a  traumatic  event  where  these  structures  are communicating  at  a  higher at  a  higher  rate  and  in  an  augmented  capacity. And  if  you  go  ahead  and  give  a  beta  blocker, which  blocks  the  arousal  signal that  is  registered  in the  amygdala  from  the  nervous  system, which  then  perpetuates  consolidation in  the  hippocampus  of  a  memory. If  you,  lots  of  an  emotional  memory, if  you  block  that, you  give  someone  a  beta-blocker  within 90  min  of  a  traumatic  event, then  that  event  is  remembered  like  a  normal  event, not  as  a  traumatic  event. And  so  that  was  when really  interesting  therapeutic  finding. So  that's  been  used a  lot  with  victims  of  things  like  rape, where  people  have  access  to  a  police  station  right  after, or  an  emergency  room  where  they  can go  ahead  and  get  therapy,  therapy  very  quickly. It's  been  a  big  deal.  Actually. It's  been  controversial,  which  with respect  to  its  use  in  military  settings, because  they're  afraid  people  will, will  not  learn  from the  traumatic  events  and  my  end  might  end  up  dying. And  so  it's  been  controversial  in  that  community. So  blocking  the  fear  memory  is something  that  was  used  as  a  therapeutic  target. Now,  storing  the  frontal  cortex  to  be  able  to  override trauma  when  someone's  experienced  trauma  or chronic  stress  is  a  whole  other  big  topic. And  that's  a  very  important  topic  because  it  turns  out that  reduced  volume  of  your  inhibitory  capacities opening  you  up  to  all  sorts  of  vulnerabilities  for  things like  drug  abuse  and mental  illness  and  a  variety  of  other  things. So  that's  a  big  ongoing  topic  of  discussion. So  let  me  skip back  without  swirling  you  through  all  the  slides. So  what  this  means  for PTSD  is  that  the  anatomical  relationship between  the  amygdala  and the  prefrontal  cortex  is  critical  in  maintaining appropriate  responding  to  stimuli associated  with  fearful  outcomes. And  this  appears  to  be  true  in  rodents  and  primates. As  I  said,  all  the  therapeutic  targets are  being  invoked  here  and  it's  been  very  important. What  does  it  mean  for  PTSD? Rather  than  considering  the  amygdala and  temporal  lobe,  PTSD, it's  very  important  to examine  the  integrity  of  the  prefrontal  cortex. As  I  mentioned,  PTSD  for  a  long  time  was  considered overlearning  of  fear  and that  can  be  corrected  some  sense. But  the  addition  of  regulating that  and  shutting  down that  capacity  has  become  very  important. There  are  also  people  that  have  been  working on  trying  to  reconsolidate  those  memories. That's  a  different  topic, but  how  people  can re-learn  the  same  queue  to  have  a  different  outcome. So  it's  like  if  a  cue  is  eliciting  a  certain  outcome, can  we  re-learn  it? There's  a  lot  of  work  on over-generalization  being  done  also. And  so  to  summarize  the  findings, reinforced  the  view  that emotional  self-regulation  is  normally implemented  by  a  neural  circuit that  comprises  various  regions  of the  prefrontal  cortex  and some  subcortical  limbic  structures. And  it  mirrors  the  importance  of anatomical  circuitry between  amygdala  and  prefrontal  cortex. I  would  add  now  actually  two  that  we  have  to  consider, the  body  and  the  signals, the  body  sending  two  more  because  they're, the  efficacy  of  the  nerves between  the  brain  and  the  body  also seem  to  be  helping  with regulatory  capacities  with  respect to  the  autonomic  nervous  system. So  that  would  be  the  next. One  more  point  that  I  always  like our  cog  psych  students  to  go  off  with. And  that  is  that  the  brain  is in  no  way  obligated  to  function according  to  the  psychological  principles that  we  impose  on  it. The  brain  functions  the  way  the  brain  functions. Imagine. If  instead  of  going  through  the  circuitry  and  trying to  figure  out  what  every  part  of  the  circuit  did. The  psychologist  said,  Oh, the  emotion  is  centered  in  the  amygdala. That's  the  emotional  center. And  so  that's  where  it's  all  at. And  they  just  decided  that  was  the  end  result. And  they  parse  the  brain  into  these  little  modules. It  wouldn't  have  worked  out  well. Instead  they're  like,  how  does  the  brain  work? How's  the  processing  flow  and  what's  the  output  here, and  what  can  we  learn  about  it? And  there's  much  more  to  be  learned with  respect  to  sensory  capacities,  et  cetera. But  that's  sort  of  the  end  of the  story  I  had  to  tell  you  today. Are  there  questions? Am  I  the  only  thing  between  you  and  your  weekends? I  think  I'm  the  only  thing  between  you  and  your  weekend. Maybe  you  should  go  be  resilient  and  engage  in a  bunch  of  activities  that  are  good  for  your  brain. Think  about  what  those  might  be. If  people  have  questions, go  ahead  and  be  free  to  ask. Otherwise,  go  have  a  great  weekend. I  think  Friday  afternoons, a  rough  crowd,  Steve. Sure  thing. You're  welcome.
